Last lecture, we introduced the notion of the limit of a function as x goes to c, which
we write limit xRoc, f of x equals l. What does this mean? This means for all epsilon
positive, there exists a delta positive such that for all x and s satisfying 0 is less
than x minus c is less than delta. We have that f of x minus l is less than epsilon.
And we proved the following theorem last time that if we have a set, a cluster point of
s, so this is where we look at limits and f as a function from s to r, then the limit
as x goes to c of f of x equals l, if and only if for every sequence x sub n converging
to c, we have f of x n, the new sequence converges to l. So this theorem here connects limits
of functions to what we did previously, limits of sequences.
Now, using this theorem, we'll get analogs of theorems we prove for sequences, but
now for limits. First, let me show a few simple applications of this theorem. So, for example,
we could prove the following that we're all c and r, limit as x goes to c of x squared
equals c squared. So we could have done this using the just a definition, but now with
this theorem, we can prove it a little bit quicker and easier. Because we essentially
did all the hard work when we proved that the product of two convergent sequences is
convergent, which is what we'll use here. So we're going to prove this theorem using the
previous theorem. So let x n. So in this theorem, since it's not stated, you should take
the function to be f of x equals x squared and then the set that is defined on s is equal
to r. So let x n be a sequence such that x n converges to c as n goes to infinity. We
now want to show that f of x n converges to f of c where f of x equals x squared. But
the product of two convergent sequences is convergent by earlier theorem about the product
of convergent sequences. We get that x n squared converges to c squared, which implies.
So we've now verified for every sequence converging to c, f of x n, meaning x n squared,
converges to f of x n converges to c squared. And therefore, by the previous theorem, we've
proven the claim. So now let's use the theorem to study a couple of more limits.
We'll use this theorem in fact to show that a certain limit does not exist. So limit
as x goes to zero, assign 1 over x. This limit does not exist. So remember, for a limit,
I look at all those points x that are close to c, but not equal to c. So this function,
which I'm taking the limit as x goes to zero, doesn't need to be defined at x equals zero
in order to consider the limit. And if you like the function sine of 1 over x is defined
on s equals r, take away zero. So this limit does not exist, but the limit as x goes to zero
of x times sine of 1 over x does exist, and equals zero. Now, I want you to note something,
you can't just stick in x equals zero here to evaluate the limit. Because then you'll
be taking sine of 1 over zero times zero. You can't divide by zero. So you can't just say
this limit equals zero because I stick in x equals zero. In fact, we saw in the previous lectures
that the limit need not equal the function evaluated at that point. So just to recall the
example from last time, when I had f of x equals 1 if x equals zero and 2 if x is not equals zero,
and we showed that limit as x goes to zero of f of x equals 2, which note does not equal f of zero.
When we discuss continuity, that's what connects the limit to the function evaluated at that point.
I just want to make that little comment.
Okay, to prove the theorem we're going to use, again, the previous theorem. Maybe I should,
now I'm not going to label it. You'll know when I point up to it that I'm referring to that
theorem that I stated up there. So in fact, let's prove the second
limit exists in equals zero first. So suppose x in is a sequence converging to zero. We now want to show
that x sub n times sine of 1 over x sub n converges to zero. Okay, and then that by the previous
theorem up there will imply that the limit as x goes to zero of x times sine of 1 over x equals zero.
Now, if I look at the absolute value of x sub n times sine of 1 over x sub n,
this is equal to the absolute value of x sub n times the absolute value of sine of 1 over x sub n.
And no matter what you stick into sine, sine is always bounded between 1 and minus 1. So the
absolute value is always bounded by 1. So just to summarize, we've shown that
x sub n is equal to zero. Okay, and now we apply the squeeze theorem. So you like that
goes to zero, it's just the constant sequence equal to zero. Since x sub n is converging to zero,
remember we're assuming that this converges to zero. And therefore what gets trapped in between
goes to zero. So by squeeze theorem, x sub n times sine of 1 over x sub n converges to zero. And
that proves the second claim. Okay, so now we'll prove one. And in the previous lecture,
I did negate this definition. So let's actually negate this theorem if you like or
use the negation of each side of this if and only if to state an equivalent theorem. So
so two statements are equivalent, which is in that theorem, if and only if their negations are
also equivalent. So but the theorem we also have the following fact, limit x goes to c of f of
x is not equal L. If and only if there exists. So negating the right hand side of that if and
only if there exists a sequence x n converging to c. So this sequence will
consisting of elements of s take away c such that x n converges to c, but we don't have
f of x n converging to L. And okay, and when I write this, you should read this as either
this limit exists and does not equal L or this limit does not exist. Okay.
So I'll even write that out. So and either limit does not exist or
does not equal L. Okay. So again, that's an equivalent way of stating the theorem up there.
Is in terms of the negation. Two statements are equivalent, which is right there if and
only if their negations are equivalent. All right. So now we're going to prove that the limit
as x goes to zero, a sign of one of where x does not exist by showing that there exists a sequence
converging to zero such that when I plug that into sign the limit of that sequence does not exist.
To show there exists a sequence converging to zero such that
the limit as n goes to infinity of sign of one over x sub n does not exist. Okay. Now,
sign oscillates between one and minus one depending on if I'm a certain multiple of pi over two.
Right. So here's the intuition behind it, behind the sequence I'm about to give you. Note that
sign of, let's say sign of x equals one if x equals pi over two,
5 pi over two, 9 pi over two and so on, minus one if x equals three pi over two,
seven pi over two, 11 pi over two and so on. So I can stick in things that are getting bigger to
sign and get one or minus one. In fact, let me change this to y since we're using x to be
essentially one over y. Okay. So if I stick in pi over two, 5 pi over two, 9 pi over two and so on,
I get sign equals one if it's three pi over two, seven pi over two, 11 pi over two and I stick
that into sign I get minus one. Okay. But that means if I stick one over these numbers into sign of
one over x, I get one or minus one. And so then that sequence that I get will be one or minus one
alternating and we know that sequence does not converge. So that's the idea. So let me write that
down. Let x sub n be one over these numbers essentially. So
two and minus one pi over two minus one because we're going to stick this into sign of one over
x. So let me just, which is two over two and minus one over pi. Okay.
Now note,
x is two over n plus one pi and since n is bigger than or equal to one, this is always bigger than or equal to zero.
So this is less than or equal to two over n pi and this goes to zero. So that shows by the squeeze
theorem that this sequence I've defined here converges to zero. But what happens when I plug
this sequence into sign of one over x, this is now equal to sign of two n minus one
pi over two. Okay. And this is therefore equal to one minus one one minus one one minus one.
Okay.
And this sequence, which is just equal to minus one to the n plus one,
why capitalize that does not converge. Okay. So we found a sequence converging to zero such that
when I stick it into the function that new sequence does not converge. So we've proven that
this limit does not exist.
All right. So I alluded to this fact that this theorem will give us
theorems that are similar to what we prove for sequences except now for
limits of functions. So let me just state kind of the simplest theorem you can get.
So let S be a subset of R.
See a cluster point of S.
And suppose I have two functions.
F going from S to R.
And G going from S to R.
Okay.
If these two limits exist.
And one function is smaller than the other.
Then, so we had a analogous statement for sequences which was if I have two sequences
converging and one is less than or equal to the other, then the limits are one limit is less
than or equal to the other. And it's an analogous conclusion for limits of functions.
Okay. So again, the analogous statement for sequences was we have two sequences, one less than
or equal to the other, which then the limit of the smaller sequences less than or equal to
the limit of the bigger sequence. Okay.
So let's give the proof. And we'll use this theorem connecting limits of functions to
limits of sequences. And then we'll use the corresponding statement which we do have for
sequences which I just stated a couple of times. So let L1 be the limit as x goes to C of f of x
and L2 be the limit as x goes to C of g of x. And what we want to show is that L1 is less than or
equal to L2. Okay. Let x in be the sequence in s take yc such that x in converges to C.
Such a sequence exists because C is a cluster point of s. All right. You proved in the
assignment that if I have a cluster point of s, then there exists a sequence in s take away C that
converges to C. Now since I stated this way by the previous theorem, this limit equals L1,
this limit equals L2 if and only if for every sequence converging to C, f of x in converges to L1
at g of x in converges to L2. By the previous theorem, we then conclude that L1 is equal to the
limit as n goes to infinity. Actually, I'm getting ahead of myself a little bit. So let's pause
right there and reset. So now we have the sequence converging to C. Then by the assumption
here for all n, f of x in is less than or equal to g of x in. And since f of x in converges to L1
and f of x in converges, g of x in converges to L2, we get by, again, this theorem about sequences,
which says if I have two sequences, f of x of n, this is one sequence, is less than or equal to
another sequence, g of x in. And they both converge, then the limits satisfy the same inequality.
Okay? Which is what we wanted to prove.
Okay. So like I said, this theorem here follows from the analogous, in fact, I should have written
this out, or in fact, I will write it out now. So the analogous statement for sequences was,
if we're all n, a n is less than or equal to b n, then limit as n goes to infinity, assuming
both limits exist, satisfy the same inequality. Okay? So this is an analogous theorem to this
theorem, which we had for sequences. And we used this theorem from sequences to prove it.
Okay? Now, following that same philosophy, you can prove analogous statements for functions,
limits of functions, as you did from sequences. You get these for free. And instead of stating all
of the theorems we did for sequences, except now for limits of functions, I'm just going to
kind of quickly say, you know, you get the same thing. So by using the previous theorem,
which connects sequences of, which connects convergence of functions to convergence of sequences,
we have analogous
theorems for. And let me state it this way,
or limits of functions now. And for example, you have a squeezed theorem.
Namely, if I have, so just talking this out, if I have three functions, say f is less than or equal to g is less than or equal to h,
and f of x, and this converges to l, h of x converges to l, then g of x converges to l. Okay? That's what I mean by an
analogous statement. You also have theorems about algebraic operations and limits, meaning that if I have two
functions that have limits as x goes to c, then f plus g will have a limit as x goes to c, and that the limit of the sum is the sum of the limits, same thing with the product, and same thing with the quotient, assuming the limit on the bottom is non-zero.
And then similarly, we also have a theorem about the absolute value and limits, namely if f of x converges to l as x goes to c, then the absolute value of f of x converges to the absolute value of l as x goes to c.
So you have all of these analogous statements, or theorems that are analogous to the statements from what we did for sequences, but now for limits of functions as x goes to c.
Okay? And I'm not going to state them all. You can see this in the textbook, maybe the proof of some of them all give as exercises.
Now let's separate the notion of a limit of a function from that of a sequence just a little bit.
So, unlike when we talk about limits of sequences, here we're letting a point x converge or get close to a point c, but there's two ways you can get close to c.
On the real number line, it can converge to c from the left, or it can converge to c from the right.
And this leads to the notion of left and right limits of a function.
Left and right limits of functions.
So, let's start the definition here and we'll go to the next board.
So, let s be a subset of r and suppose c is a cluster point of minus infinity,
so we can see zero intersect c intersect s.
So, what I'm defining now is a notion of a function converging to something as x goes to c from the left.
That's why I'm looking at only s intersect minus infinity to c. So, I'm only looking to the left of c.
We say f of x converges to l as x converges to c from the left by putting a minus sign up here.
If it's a similar definition as that of a theorem or that of the limit,
but now we only look at x getting close to c from the left.
If for all epsilon positive there exists a delta positive such that for all x and s satisfying c minus delta is less than x is less than c.
So, it's close to c but to the left of c we have that f of x minus l is less than epsilon.
In this case we write the limit as x goes to c with a minus sign up top f of x equals l.
And then we have an analogous definition for converging to or taking a limit of a function as x goes to c from the right.
c is cluster point of c infinity c come infinity intersect s. So, I should say if.
Suppose c is a cluster point of now just taking s that's to the right of c.
Then we say that f of x converges to l as x converges to c plus meaning as x converges to c from the right.
If for all epsilon positive there exists a delta positive such that for all x and s satisfying c is less than x is less than c plus delta.
So, now it's close to c but to the right of c we have that f of x minus l is less than epsilon.
Okay and similarly to the notation up there we write limit as x goes to c plus of f of x equals l.
Now, just like we proved this theorem for limits you can state and prove an analogous statement for one sided limit.
So, such a statement would be for example limit as x goes to c minus of f of x equals l if and only if for every sequence x sub n satisfying x sub n is less than c converging to c we have f of x and converges to l.
Okay so these two just kind of limit how f behaves near a point c if we're just looking to the left of c or to the right of c.
Okay but not at c. So, let's for example look at I think this is usually referred to as the heavy side function so f of x equals 0 for x less than or equal to 0 and 1.
If x is less bigger than or equal to 0. Okay so graph is like that and why do why do you know people care about this function well in a certain sense if you take the derivative of this function you get what's called the direct delta function although that's not a function that's a distribution.
But you know that's why this function has a name to attach to it because if you take us to derivative you get something somewhat special.
Anyways we're not interested we're not even at derivatives we're not even going to talk about distributions in this class so let's get back to one sided limits.
So, if I look at this function for x close to 0 from the left f is just 0 so in fact I can since I'm only looking at x to the left of 0 in this limit.
This is just plugging in x less than 0 so I get 0 and that's just 0. Okay and if I look at this function from the right.
To the right of 0 then f of x is just 1 it's just 1 identically and so I get.
And it's again so although I haven't shown that one sided limits of constants equal to constant I think that should be something you can easily believe or write out yourself.
So for this function we see that it does have two sided limits except those limits don't equal each other.
And they certainly don't equal so you know this one does equal f of 0 but I could have made f of 0 to be a half and then this still would have been 0 and not equal to the function evaluated at the point.
So again I'm making this point that for limits just limits it does not matter what the function is doing at the point.
Limit only cares about how a function behaves near a point.
So I'm going to make one sided limits augment that by saying we're only going to care about the function near the point and to the left limit and to the right for the right limit.
So I didn't say that but this we call the left limit this we call the right limit simply because we're coming getting close to see from the right and from the left.
Okay.
Alright so but what is the connection between left and right limits we have the following so.
So let s be a subset of r f be a function from s to r and suppose that c is cluster point of both sets minus infinity to c intersect s.
Okay. That way I can talk about the left and right limits of c or at c.
So first off if c is a cluster point of any one of these sets it's going to be a cluster point of the set s.
Okay so we can actually look at the limit. So then the limit as x goes to c of f of x exists and equals L if and only if the limit as x goes to c from the left of f of x equals the limit as x goes to c from the right of f of x equals L.
Okay. So you know this kind of looks like the theorem we proved about limb soup and limb m but you know they don't have any they don't have any connection.
Okay.
You know so okay kind of what if you want to make some sort of connection between the way this theorem looks and the statement of the theorem for limb m and limb soup.
So this is kind of saying that limit of a function equals L if we approach from the left or right the f the function f approaches L.
Okay. And for the limb soup limb m guy that we did for sequences you could take that as saying that the limit of a sequence equals L if and only if kind of following the sequence from below that approaches L and following the sequence from above that also approaches L.
Okay. So you know there's kind of two directions there just as there's two directions here but not really.
Okay.
So let's give a quick proof of the theorem.
It's not difficult it follows almost immediately from the definitions.
In fact I'm going to do only one direction so kind of this direction should assuming this and proving this should be pretty clear.
Okay. If I have this this means that you know if I want to be close to L I just need to be close to C and therefore it doesn't matter if I'm close to C from the left or right I'll be close to L.
And going this direction this says I just need to be close to C from the left sufficiently close and I need to be close to C from the right sufficiently close to be close to L.
Okay. You know so really there's not a lot of trickiness in the proof it's just writing these things out and so I'm just going to write out one direction and leave the other direction to you.
So let's assume that the left limit equals the right limit equals L and now we want to show that the limit as X goes to C of F of X equals L.
Now we want to show limit as X goes to C of F of X equals L.
So let's go back to the definition let epsilon be positive we want to be able to find a delta so that F of X is within epsilon to L if X is within delta to C.
And what's the point here C and here's L so this is the picture that goes along with this assuming these two limits equal L I know that if that there exists a delta one so that if I'm in this interval then here's L.
So plus epsilon L minus epsilon then if I'm within delta one to C and to the left then F will
L will be close to L in that interval.
And then since the limit as X goes to C from the right equals L there exists some delta two so that if I'm in this interval then I'll be again close to L.
But this means that if I choose the smaller of these two and I look at the whole interval then F will be close to L on the whole interval and that's it.
So let epsilon be positive since limit as X goes to C minus F of X equals L this implies there exists delta one positive such that if X minus C is less than delta one then I get that F of X.
If C minus delta one is less than X is less than delta less than C this implies that F of X minus L is less than epsilon and similarly for the right limit since limit as X goes to C plus of F of X equals L this implies by the definition there exists delta two.
So if I choose positive such that if C is less than X is less than C plus delta two then I get F of X minus L is less than epsilon.
Now choose delta to be the minimum of delta one and delta two. And then we'll now show that this delta works.
So now we're going to show this delta works.
So if less than delta then this implies that either X is in C minus delta.
So if we take something close with in delta to C and delta is the minimum of these two distances then for the sake of this picture let's say delta one equals delta two.
So now I'm looking at this interval then two cases either X is in C minus delta C which is a subset of C minus delta one C since delta is the minimum of those two of those two delta which implies by the first inequality here for delta one.
Or X is in C plus delta which is a subset of C plus delta two which by our choice of delta two gives us that.
So if X minus C is less than delta then F of X minus L is less than epsilon.
Let's see end of the proof.
I've said this over and over again. Limits of functions don't care about what the function is doing at the point.
Now we're going to discuss the notion of continuity which connects the limit of a function at a point to the function so it connects how a function behaves near a point to the function evaluated at the point.
And so we can even write this down how a function behaves near a point
compared to
what we're staring you in the face is that the definition of continuity is that the limit as X goes to C of F of X equals F of C.
So we had these examples where the limit I think already erased it but where the limit exists but does not equal F of C.
And here for continuity the notion of continuity is that the limit as X goes to C of F of X actually equals the function evaluated at that point.
So the following definition with Sb is subset of R and C in element of S.
Let's say F is continuous at C if for all epsilon positive there exists a delta positive such that
we're all X and S satisfying X minus C is less than delta. So in particular look I can now for example X equals C will satisfy this inequality.
I don't have the zero is less than that. So for all X and S which are close to C within delta I have that F of X will be within epsilon of F of C.
So in this case, so just a little F is continuous at every point on its domain that we're considering we just say F is continuous.
So for a function to be continuous at a point,
we're all right. Near by X being near C should mean that F of X should be near F of C.
And we'll go through some examples remember whenever you get a definition you should look for examples and then potentially negate it will negate this definition in just a second to show that a function I wrote down a minute ago is not continuous.
So the function so the affine function F of X equals A times X plus B. So S is R so X is a real number is continuous function meaning it's continuous at a point of X.
So we're going to get every real number C. So let's prove this. Let's see B an element of R we want to show F is continuous at C. So we have to go through the definition.
So then the epsilon to be positive choose delta to be epsilon over 1 plus absolute value of A.
And last time in the previous lecture I kind of gave the intuition on why you would choose this delta based on the function and epsilon.
I get a computation here I'm just going to choose delta this way and you'll see that it works. So now we have to show this delta works if X minus C is less than delta we should be able to now show that F of X minus F of C is less than epsilon.
This is equal to A X plus B minus AC plus B. So this is equal to A times X minus C.
Which equals absolute value of A times absolute value of X minus C. This is less than delta.
F of X minus C is less than delta times A which equals absolute value of A over 1 plus the absolute value of A times epsilon.
So this is less than epsilon. Because A number over 1 plus that number is always less than 1.
Maybe you were wondering why didn't I just choose delta to be epsilon over the absolute value of A. This is just a smidgen of sophistication that what happens if the absolute value of A is equal to zero then we would have divided by zero.
So adding a one there takes care of that. So this guy is continuous at every C. So this function is continuous.
So I have a function that is not continuous at a point.
Make sure this is the next topic.
Like here is a non-example. The function F of X which equals 1 if X equals zero to X not equal to zero.
So that's the function.
So F is not continuous at zero.
So to prove this let's negate the definition of continuity.
So the negation of continuity is so F is not continuous at C.
So the for all become there exists. And there exists become for all. So if there exists some bad epsilon.
So that for all delta positive there exists an X such that X minus C is less than delta. And we do not have.
The second inequality F of X minus F of C is bigger than or equal to this bad epsilon.
Now for this guy it's pretty clear which X to choose. So let's think this out for a minute.
There should be some bad epsilon zero so that if I take any small interval around zero I can find a point in this interval.
So that F of X minus F of C is going to be bigger than or equal to epsilon zero.
Now here F of C is F of zero which is 1. Now what would be the bad epsilon so that F of 1 is greater than distance 1 or greater than distance epsilon zero to F of X for some X in this interval.
Well if I take any X in this interval other than zero and stick it into F I'm going to get 2 and that's with greater than or equal to distance 1 to F of zero.
So epsilon zero I will choose to be 1. Now we want to prove that F this function here is not continuous at zero.
So I will tell you what the bad epsilon is choose epsilon zero equals 1.
So now we have to show this bad epsilon zero is indeed bad.
It's built to be positive. We have to now find a number in this interval so that F of X minus F of C is bigger than or equal to 1.
And like I said a minute ago if you take any X in this interval other than zero and stick it into F I get 2 which is distance 1 to F of zero.
X be delta over 2 say. Then X minus zero is less than delta it's actually equal to delta over 2.
And F of X minus F of zero is equal to 2 minus 1 which is bigger than or equal to epsilon zero.
So this function is not continuous. And so next time I'll just leave this question here which will address in the next lecture but it's a simple question.
So first off if you look at this function it shouldn't be too hard to convince yourself so you're also told in your child that a function is continuous if you can draw the graph and not lift up the pencil which I better not see on the exam if I ask you about continuity but anyways for the sake of this conversation let's take that as the intuition.
So you can convince yourself that this function is continuous over here though right if I'm getting close to let's say this is minus 1 then the function is getting close to 2 and the value of the function at minus 1 is 2 so the function is getting close to the value of the function at minus 1.
And the same for if I'm over looking at equals 1 so you know you should be able to convince yourself that this function is continuous at every point other than at the origin zero.
So a natural question to ask is let f be a function let's say defined on the whole real number line does there exist a point in R such that f is continuous at this point C.
For this example over here we were able to you know any point other than zero the functions continuous there.
So a natural question is let's say I take an arbitrary function doesn't have to have a point where it's continuous and next time we'll see that that answer is no we'll give an example that's I think due to Dirichlay because it's named after him but you know naming doesn't necessarily mean anything in math green
serum is named after green but he didn't prove it so maybe it was due to somebody else and we'll use a similar characterization of continuity that's kind of analogous to this first statement we had for limits and we'll do that next time.